land use, as I was saying, Project Ag updating all
the land use, Jonathan had decided that he wanted
to move into the area what we would refer to as
developing planning areas for the city and sector
planning, and then assigning various personnel
as area planners to work under the senior planner
in charge of advanced planning at that time. Who
was that? That was Bill Pearson. And
it took a little time to get started. It was mainly
set up after what had been happening in Fort Worth.
And I don't recall the date, but during this
period, it also brought down from Fort Worth
Emilio Once-DeVise, who became our senior
planner. And of course, as you know, Emilio is now
back with the city of Fort Worth again. So things
have a way of making a circle. During that interim
of trying to set up the sector planning at that
time, one of the new programs the federal
government was sponsoring was the Community
Renewal Program under the Department of Housing
and Urban Development. And of course, the
Community Renewal Program had become the
planning forerunner to what would ultimately
hope to be the passing of an urban renewal
referendum, which never did happen. And when the
Community Renewal Program was set up, they were
located at some administrative offices situated
in Washington Park Zoo, which was subject of many
jokes. And Mr. Bill Adams, the Assistant Director
of Planning under Jonathan, took a leave of
absence from that position to become the director
of the community road program. And of course, Mr.
Adams brought in Kern Ewing as his assistant
director. And Kern is the person, the reason I
mention him, he is the person who eventually
caused my relocation to the city of Corpus
Christi. If everyone recalls, community road
programs were primarily set up for funding on two
to three year basis. And as the CRP, as it's known,
was about to close down in the city of El Paso, Kern
had accepted a job to head up the Community Rule
Program for the city of Corpus Christi. And I
believe that occurred in 1971.
And after about two years with the program,
Kern, basically the program, the Community Rule
Program, in Corpus was first to set up a data bank
for both land uses and other kinds of
socioeconomic information to do an economic
study of the city of Corpus Christi. And from
there, it was intended to lead into
identification of the most severely blighted
areas, areas which would be identified as future
urban renewal areas.
At about that time, so the emphasis of the
community renewal programs, as it had been with
many other CRPs across the state, was the
accumulation of socioeconomic type of data. Now,
if I can regress backwards, under Jonathan
Cunningham, Jonathan Cunningham, in my opinion,
was a traditionalist type of planner. He was very
physical planning oriented, and not only that, he
was a very good manipulator in terms of working his
projects his projects and the various political
processes with tremendous success, never taking
credit primarily for the projects that were
completed as his own, but somehow convincing
other people within the community leadership
that this was their idea and that they needed to
follow through with it. Like the mayor and so
forth. Like the mayor, your city council members
are maybe one of the more affluent persons in some
sort of community-wide organization. People who
would have the leadership ability and the
influence to move certain things. This must have
made Jonathan a rather powerful person in
government. For the time that I was in El Paso,
Jonathan Cunningham, as I shortly found out, was
in conjunction with the director of public works,
George Deiter. Those two men were the most
powerful. How do you spell his name? It's
D-I-E-T-E-R. George Deiter and Jonathan were
basically the runners. They ran the city. There
wasn't anything that the council would do unless
they unless Mr. Dieter and Mr. Cunningham had
given their blessing to the project. And I don't
recall how many years Jonathan was with El Paso,
but I know it was over 30 years. And it's just
amazing for a director of planning to develop that
kind of
power from his position and maintain it. over that
length of period. And he used it wisely. There's a
lot of related stories about Jonathan and how he
ended up winning the budget wars as everyone went
to the city council. You have to remember that the
city of El Paso was and still is a strong mayor form
of government.
former council, former government. They had
tried to attempt to change it over to a city manager
type, but they as yet not succeeded. And in lieu of
not having an officially appointed head of city
government to manage the city's businesses as any
other professional businessman would do, John
Cunningham and George Dieter assumed that role.
And it became very effective. I think John's
demise as far as his power base was concerned began
occurring with the retirement of George Deeder
from his office and also the realization on the
part of some politicians who I have known
personally feeling that Mr. Cunningham had taken
what had once been a very small department of
planning and built it into a very powerful
organization utilizing
the advantages of
grants available from the federal government,
including such programs as you recall, open
space, urban beautification, et cetera, your 701
planning, community renewal planning, your
relocation. And he just assumed control over all
these projects and just expanded them and
expanded the staff where that that one way or
another anything that was done in the city of El
Paso had to be brought back through the Department
of Planning. That's the way it ought to be. But it
was good. At the same time, Jonathan Cullingham
was the single person in charge of that entire
process and it made him very powerful and the
politicians themselves were afraid of that. And
although I had since departed, just from what I had
read and heard from my colleagues back in El Paso,
slowly but surely the politicians began to break
down Mr. Cunningham's power base, splitting out a
lot of the grants activities into other
departments, such as the Community Development
Bank grants, a lot of grants. which are very
significant in terms of total dollars and impact
on the community for physical improvements. But
anyway, this is one of the amazing things about
John. John had always been the type of
professional planner with a management skill
that tended to elevate his people that he was
trying to teach. And for the most part, at the time I
started, I was not even aware. of professional
planning schools, etc., or never even thought of
attending one. I had never even thought of staying
on with the Department of Planning for more than
one year. I had always intended to return to law
school to finish that up. But I became very, so
involved in planning and I enjoyed it so much, I
just couldn't think of a better way to continue.
You know, we could always look at the the money side
of it and it was very apparent that you wouldn't get
rich being a public service planner for any city
but there were other kinds of benefits that that
you enjoyed and other than civil service
protection but the fact that you were actually
having some impact on the community and how it was
going to look and it carried with it a lot of respect
and and as you've moved further up the ladder a lot
of responsibility After the community renewal
program in the city of Corpus Christi had gotten
well underway after those first two years, they
had, for the most part, completed the collection
of data that they needed, both demographic and
socioeconomic. And they had also divided the city
up into planning areas. So they could aggregate
their data for planning areas and set up a land use
data bank. And they had done a condition of housing
condition of structure survey city-wide, and
they were ready to move into some more physical
aspects of planning. And at that time, Kern Ewing
had written me a letter and followed up a phone call
one day asking if I would be interested in coming
down here and being, starting as a planner one,
coming out here and working on planning. I did fail
to mention that as the community renewal program
in El Paso was beginning to fade out, phase out, lot
of the personnel that they had there on the program
have been finding other jobs and rightfully so
they they you know they they knew that the program
only had several months to a wife left into a
budgetary life anyway and i was temporarily
reassigned from the downtown planning offices to
the washington zoo to assist kern ewing and bill
adams and a couple other staff able to finish off to
wrap up the CRP. And our program there at that time,
the wrap-up was doing, on a very small scale,
neighborhood plans for each one of the, I think it
was 13 to 14 neighborhoods that we identified as
needing, in dire need of some type of urban
renewal. And which all these same reports were
published in some volumes. These are the volumes
up here, a culmination of that entire project.
There's five volumes there. One thing you can
never change charts or say about, one of the things
you can always say about the federal government is
they've never been lacking on paperwork. They're
very impressive looking. But we had them out
there. One of the questions that comes to mind is
that in terms of Corpus Christi's community
renewal effort, In view of the fact that Corpus
Christi never did act upon the urban renewal
aspects of the original Bartholomew plan, that
must have suggested something in regard to
community attitudes toward potential community
renewal efforts. And I'm just wondering if that
came to pass in the CRP program for Corpus Christi.
Was it successful, do you think? It was never. I
think the efforts of the Community Renewal
Program, Corpus Christi, were very successful,
but it didn't, not in having an immediate impact on
the community or in convincing the community that
we needed an urban renewal referendum and urban
renewal agency. It didn't have that kind of
immediate impact. I think in the long run, the work
that the staff members of CRP did had a lot of impact
in providing the information that we as planners
and the managerial staff needed to make
decisions. And so I can't honestly say whether or
not the total dollars spent in the community
renewal program effort could be measured against
its immediate impact if it would be worth it.
That's really hard to say. But I can say, I think,
very honestly, that the kind of work that was done
with CRP, the fact that we, even though I'm more of a
physical type of planner and a provisor of John
Cunningham,
I think one of the things I'd like to detail for you,
and this is, in my opinion, my observation, the
emphasis, the planning programs here in this
city, this community of Corpus Christi, has taken
over the last 10 years. And the changes that I have
observed, drastic changes in the kinds of
planning work that we do as a department. I'll back
up a little bit. I joined the staff, community
renewal program staff, March 19, 1973. So from
that date, this March 19th, 1983, I had been here 10
years. I came in for the sole purpose of developing
for Kern Ewing, who was the director, and Leonard
Jameson was assistant director, a comprehensive
land use plan for the city of Corpus Christi. All
the other work that goes into a comprehensive plan
had, for the most part, been studied and detailed
and information was available. I was talking
about the socio-economic information, the
community facilities, you know, et cetera. But
they didn't have the total land use plan. I think
it's in- Kern Ewing was planning director. Kern
Ewing was the director. That's a good point. Kern
Ewing was the director of the Community Renewal
Program. The Community Renewal Program was a
division of the Department of Urban Development,
which was under a director by the name of Ernest
Briones, now our deputy city manager.
Well, let me say something about that
organization. It was my understanding that at the
time community rural program monies were being
made available to urbanized areas, that Corpus,
as it was in El Paso and many other cities, was
invited to apply, and the money, based on the
application, was granted to the city. Mr.
Anderson, being the department head for the
Department of Planning, was responsible for
making sure that application was put together.
Mr. Earl Gadds, Mr. Anderson's senior planner at
that time, prepared the application. For the
reasons I'm really hazy about, Mr. Goetz did not
desire to be the acting director of the community
program in the same manner that Mr. Bill Adams in El
Paso took a temporary leave of absence from his
assistant director job and became the director of
CRP. And because there was nobody on staff at the
time that would have the time to direct these CRP
activities, research activities, the then city
manager, Mr. Marvin Townsend, turned the
responsibilities over to Mr. Ernest Briones, who
had formerly been a health department employee.
But Mr. Briones had, in my opinion, a lot of
administrative skills, very good management
skills. When Kern was brought in, basically back
in 71, the first thing he did was put together a
staff, qualified individuals, not of what I would
characterize as a planning type, none of which
came from Texas A&M University, several who came
from the LBJ School of Public Affairs. Most of them
had economic and sociological type of
undergraduate work and graduate work behind
them. And that program was, in my opinion, a
beginning of a transition from an emphasis on
physical planning, short-range type of planning
that that moved into more of the social economic
type of planning looking at some of the human needs
of the community as opposed to the physical needs
such as street improvements water sewer
extensions new utilities etc and we had over the
years i can recall you know we had gone through so
many different kinds of programs the planners
seem to be in my opinion the most versatile
professional group in the world They seem to be
able to do anything that happens to be brought
before them. I've always told some of the people
who work for us, we never say no to a project. We'll
say yes first and then we'll go about doing it and
we'll find we're resourceful enough to figure out
how to do it.
this is this we had moved from as you can remember
some of the urban beautification programs the
open space programs that you can recall the
multitude of federal grants that were offered for
community for community development and it was
really ironic at two and funny at the time the
planners became known by various titles
depending on what program was in we had open space
specialists we had urban renewal specialist, and
we had urban beautification specialist, and CRP
specialist, as it came to be known. But anyway, we
had moved through collecting all the
socioeconomic type data from the city and ready to
start pulling together the pieces of
comprehensive plan. One of the problems that we
had, and fortunately for me, working under Mrs.
Cunningham and coming up here as I did, He left me
with some real good feelings about Mr. Anderson,
who was at that time the director of planning. And
although the Community Road Program was not under
his direct control, it did...
I did make the effort when I got here to personally
get to know Mr. Anderson better and to start
working with his staff because I knew that my job in
developing a land use plan outside the auspices of
the Department of Planning would be almost
impossible. I needed that kind of close
cooperation. And that's one of the first things I
set out doing. And working with some of the staff
members, Mr. Larry Winger, who's the chief
planner now, basically the director of planning
now, and Mr. Ogatz and several other people,
because they had the, not only they had some of the
resources, the mapping resources that we needed,
but they had some of the, local expertise that we
needed on what, in their opinion, was going to
happen to some of the developable lands in our
community. Unfortunately, the direction that
the Community Renewal Program was taking as far as
planning was concerned was not the direction that
our former city manager, Mr. Townsend, wanted it
to go.
The Community Renewal Program studies and a lot of
staff members began raising
very controversial type of issues that only could
be resolved through council, doing a lot of soul
searching and developing some policies. And
these kinds of policy questions is what I gather in
the past had never been confronted with the
council. Historically, planning and the city of
Corpus Christi had taken a back burner since the
formulation and adoption of the comprehensive
plan prepared in 1958 by Harlan Bartholomew and
Associates. That plan was sponsored, and I mean by
sponsored, paid for by the Chamber of Commerce's
Area Development Committee. However, I suppose
at that time that there was enough good working
relationships between the chamber and the cities
and the county, that when the plan was brought
before our governmental jurisdictions, that it
was endorsed. That is the only plan that's been
adopted, comprehensive plan, for the city of
Ropes Christi. The community road program,
realizing what we needed was a new plan, began
working towards that direction. 1963, 1964, this
area, under the leadership of William Anderson
and several people at the State Department of
Highways, and under the federal guidelines of the
1962 Federal Highway Act, developed the first, as
I've been told, comprehensive transportation
planning study.
which was published ultimately in 63 and 64. And
this was an effort that culminated from the work of
not only the city of Corpus Christi, but the State
Highway Department and also Nueces County, which
Nueces County and Corpus at that time constituted
the urbanized area. And I think the Navigation
District. The Navigation District also was
involved.
The plan, although it was published in 63 and 64,
and what was the title, a transportation plan,
really became our second approved comprehensive
plan for the urbanized area. Because you cannot do
transportation planning very effectively and
ignore the other elements of a comprehensive
plan. And so as far as the planning, of the
preparation of the transportation plan went, it
included every single element of a comprehensive
plan. It was just labeled the transportation
plan. It became the tool for carrying out planning
in the Corpus area. To give you an idea how
anti-planning, I think, the community became, in
1967, 68, Harlem Athalamian Associates were
brought back to Corpus, also under the Area
Development Committee of the Chamber of Commerce
to update their 1958 plan. This is it right in front
of you. Which, you know, after ten years it needed
to be updated. According to Anderson, the first
plan had been built out and it had, in fact, come
into reality so that the community needed another
plan to go forward into the future. That's true.
And I think if you go back through the 1958 plan,
you'll find that the majority of significant
recommendations for physical improvements and
growth, the type of growth in our community, were
followed. Although there were a few isolated
projects that were extremely controversial. As
soon as we have the harbor bridge, connecting our
North Beach to our mainland. That was very
controversial. The connection itself wasn't
controversial. We knew we needed that. But there
was a lot of controversy over whether it should be a
bridge or should it be a tunnel. And it's my
understanding and recollection from just
talking with Anderson that the former mayor, or
the mayor at that time, was really interested in
having a tunnel. I mean, he wanted a tunnel. And he
also owned a lot of property over there. I don't
know if those two were related, but he felt that the
tunnel was the best means. And when he was outvoted
as far as going for a tunnel or a high bridge, he
resigned his office to mayor. And that's how
controversial that project was. That's pretty
controversial. But nevertheless, you're
correct. The plan had outlived its usefulness.
Most of the projects that were recommended in it
were accomplished or were well underway of being
accomplished. And there was a definite need for an
update or a new plan covering another 20-year
plan, period. So with that kind of background, you
know, the Area Development Committee embarked
upon another update using the same associates.
And paid for in the same way? Paid for in the same
way. Well, I'm not sure where all the money came
from. It may even be that the City of Corpus Christi
put some money into it, but I don't think so. I think
it was an Area Development Committee plan. And the
Area Development Committee, I shouldn't say Area
Development Committee Plan. They don't call it
their plan. It's a plan for the community. They
didn't want that kind of label on it. But I believe
the plan was completed and it was done, as well as
the first one was done. And it was very reasonable.
It was implementable. There were some sections of
the plan in my opinion, were really off the wall.
And I think it created a lot of problems for the
consultants in that they had gone, they had some
fun with the project after they were through with
the basic report. And they put together a separate
report called Offshore Highway Proposals, where
they intended to build a major transportation
facility leading from the Cayo de Oso Bay to the,
you know, traversing the Corpus Christi Bay and
back into downtown. It was an alternate route into
downtown. I've got to remember that this is prior
to the strong environmentals and there was also
very pie in the sky type of planning and it was never
well received either and I don't know how much that
particular proposal went in discrediting the
whole report but I think there was some problems at
the time when the plan was finally brought before
presented to the city council and i think there was
some some jealousies that it wasn't a plan that was
commissioned by their own city council and
developed under their direction that it was
commissioned by someone outside them and they
just did not want to adopt it and they didn't ever
since that time any other document that has come
before the council that was comprehensive in
nature, that required some sort of endorsement,
has been endorsed by concept alone. And this is
basically what this means. It gives a councilman
an out, not to follow any specific policy
recommendations or to achieve any kind of
quantifiable objectives. just endorsed in
concept alone. And that includes the Bayfront
development plans that have been developed over
the past. That includes some of the area or
neighborhood plans that we have developed.
So basically, we just use these plans as
conceptual guides. Now, I'll leave it up to you to
determine how effective that is to a planner. You
can't go back to a city council with this as a
conceptual guide and say, this is what we need to
do, this is what we talked about doing two years
ago, because it doesn't have the importance. I say
this because the transportation plan is not
conceptually improved. It is adopted. It is
project specific. It is also long range. And the
reason it is adopted officially that is a
requirement when the 1962 federal rate highway
act was passed the department of transportation
the secretary to the department of
transportation was given sole authority to
withhold any federal funding for highway
improvements if he determined in his own opinion
that the urbanized area didn't develop these
projects quote within the framework of a planning
process that was both comprehensive
and developed cooperative among local area
governments, and that it was coordinated with all
other planning functions. And with that kind of
sign-off required in order to continue receiving
urban systems funds for highway improvements,
that left little question for what kind of
approval city council had to give to it. Since that
time, we have been using the tool of approving a
master transportation plan for this area as our
way of addressing other comprehensive planning
needs. What do you mean by that? I mean that we
happen to include in our transportation plan a
land use element.
we have to include in our transportation plan
sections dealing with various utilities.